---
title: Can Python Generate Truly Random Numbers?
date: 2022/10/16
description: Yes, but not using math.random or random() module. Can we prove it? Yes. To demonstrate how the numbers are not truly random, I undertook few experiments. These numbers are generated by pseudorandom number generator (PRNG), which is a technique for creating data that appears random but is nevertheless repeatable.
tag: Python
author: Rohit Prasan Mandal
---

## Can python generate Truly Rnadom Numbers?

```
"Anyone who attempts to generate random numbers by deterministic means is, of course, living in a state of sin." - John von Neumann
```


Yes, but not using `math.random` or `random()` module. The numbers generated by these modules are predictable, which does not confom to the definition of random number generation[^1]. I've conducted few experiments to prove how these numbers generated by these modules are not really random. These numbers are simply generated with pseudorandom number generator (PRNG), which is a technique for creating data that appears random but is nevertheless repeatable. I'll describe how these algorithms work and few other popular PRNG algorithms we can use. 

*Only cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator (CSPRNG) can generate truly random numbers.* 

A pseudo-random number is suitable for most purposes. For example, if we wish to do a random sampling of a large dataset, we need numbers to enter into the programme so that the samples are more or less fairly distributed. In this scenario, using pseudo-random numbers is totally appropriate because the degree of unpredictability has no quantitative advantage. Similarly, a music player in "shuffle" mode is likely to be playing in pseudo-random mode, with a discernable pattern if one listen hard enough.

#### Non CSPRNG Algorithms : 
- **Linear Feedback Shift Registers(LFSR) :** Many so-called random number generators, such as those based on LFSR are not cryptographically secure, as it is possible to predict the sequence from a short prefix of the sequence


#### CSPRNG Algorithms :

- **Hardware Random Generator :** In python, under OS module `os.urandom()` returns a string of size random bytes suitable for cryptographic use. It can returns a string and random bytes. Random bytes returned by this function depend on the underlying operating system's random data source


### Experiment 1 : Visualization 
The change  in standard deviation & mean with respect to the number of iterations.

### Experiment 2 : Randomness Test 
Through this test[^2] 

## Conclusion 
Computers are capable of generating truly random numbers by observing some outside data using Hardware Random Generators. For example, mouse movements, the thermal noise from the environment, the atmosphere noise, which are not predictable. This is also known as entropy. But most of the time we use “pseudorandom” numbers generator algorithms, so the results appear random, even though they aren't. 

Here's our work creating a Hardware Random Generator, and it's randomness test. [GitHub]()

[^1]: Random number generation is a process by which, often by means of a random number generator, a sequence of numbers or symbols that cannot be reasonably predicted better than by random chance is generated. Wikipedia
[^2]: Randomness-Test is a method of evaluating data; it examines the distribution of a collection of data to see whether it can be characterised as random.

